---
layout: post
title: My values
categories: review
date: 2020-11-20
---

The fundamental principles that I want to drive my decision-making. Trying to be transparent about what I care about-- to make myself think about it, as a reminder, for accountability, and... because I can be.

Last updated: January 9, 2024

## Connection

LOVE // FAMILY // FRIENDS // ECOLOGY // GRATITUDE // FLEXIBILITY

Have the mental energy and flexibility to cultivate close relationships // Give and receive love freely
*Practice this now:* Text people back // Write letters and send mail // 5+ gratitudes a day // Ask for critical and honest feedback // Practice “attempathy”
*So I can do this later:*  Be a role model and mentor for Sophie, Anya, and Bela // Live carbon neutral // **Visit NYC and go to fancy places** // Get another puppy

*2021 intentions:* (1) Keep up with letter writing.

- (1) Did this, with Erin and Sabrina and Grandma

*2022 intentions:* Reach out to friends or family at least once a week to talk. // Keep up with gratitudes. // Give gifts often. // Continue sending Maya’s Musings. // Care for Laguna and my plant babies.

*2023 review:* Postcrossing [sent 134 postcards to 31 countries and  received 141 from 27 countries] // Maya’s Musings (sent 9 newsletters) // Gave gifts often // Sent mail to friends and family // Science Pen Pals // Bought and cared for some plants (though I forgot about a few, too) // Spent time with dogs when possible // Initiated or hung out with friends a few times. // Stayed attuned to gratitudes (somewhat irregularly), and let people know when and why I appreciated them  // Spent time with Anya, Bela, Sophie, and others 

*2024 intentions:* Keep up my letter and postcard writing // Continue to develop and send Maya’s Musings // Acquire and nurture more plants // “Give” more intentionally in my friendships [Dedicate at least 1 hour per week to actual friend time]  // Create and gift thoughtful presents

## Authenticity

CONGRUENCE // HONESTY // GROWTH  // COURAGE // INDEPENDENCE // EQUANIMITY

Articulate my perspective // Stand by my values // Have the courage to be flexible // Say what I believe and do what I say
“This is water.” 
*Practice this now:* Anticipate 1-, 5-, and 10- year consequences of my actions // Do something once and not the next day
*So I can do this later:* Live with choice in line with my values // Make decisions with intentionality and conscientiousness  // **Maintain legal independence**

*2021 intentions:* (1) Don't keep reading books I hate. // (2) Keep finding a quote of the day. // (3) Formulate opinions on the topics I read about. // (4) Journal three pages a day. // (5) Breathing. Do it often.

- (1) Still need to work on this. Read/listened to a lot of things I really didn’t like. // (2) Stopped every day, but still record good ones if I come across them. That’s okay, too. // (3) Somewhat do this through my newsletter. // (4) Definitely didn’t do this. Should increase journalling efforts. // (5) Got out of the habit, but trying to reintegrate at least once a day.

*2022 intentions:* (1) Don’t read books I hate! // (2) Identify the driving forces of my habits & routines. // (3) Journal one page a day (gotta start somewhere) // (4) Keep sending Maya’s Musings, with increasing commentary! // (5) Breathe, stretch, or yoga once a day.

*2023 review:* 

*2024 intentions:*  Develop and record questions and beliefs // Study myself [tracking emotions, etc.] // Value my sleep more  

## Challenge

PERSEVERANCE // PURPOSE // MASTERY // ACHIEVEMENT // RESPONSIBILITY

Make an impact on the world // Push the limits of what I can do // Have a purpose & embrace responsibility
“Do more.”
*Practice this now:* 1+ min cold showers // Read 2+ research articles a week 
*So I can do this later:* Train for a marathon, triathlon, big hike // **Dive deep into research**

*2021 intentions:* (1) Either read an article, save it, or skip it— don’t just scroll through.

- Sometimes did this, but still a work in progress.

*2022 intentions*: (1) Read an article or skip it— don’t just scroll through. // (2) Learn something or work on research every day. // (3) Move my body in some way that fits what it feels.  

*2023 review:* NNFC conference in Boston // Lots of puzzles that make me think // Getting a little more financially literate and starting to invest (as responsibly as I can) 

*2024 intentions:* Check in monthly on investment portfolio // Run full experiments independently in both labs // Puzzle often // Find a way to regularly engage with/contribute to my community [KH?] // Set and work towards a functional strength or endurance goal

## Adventure

CREATIVITY // CURIOSITY // EXPLORATION // WONDER

“To travel is to explore without a hypothesis.”
Be a life-long learner // Keep on with scientific discovery // Pursue my interests, no matter how random // Actively seek wonder // Explore my physical, intellectual, and creative worlds // Be still to do artful things
*Practice this now:* Draw once in awhile // Go outside every day // Keep reading
*So I can do this later:* Go to Patagonia // Surf camp in Costa Rica

*2021 intentions:*  (1) Create something every day. // (2) Run outside when I can.

- (1) Did this, for the most part. // (2) Did not do this. Will start when possible.

*2022 intentions:* (1) Continue creating something every day. // (2) Read a poem or book each day. // (3) Go outside and be observant when doing so. 

*2023 review:* Hiking, biking, and exploring in Banff // Solid art practice for the first 3/4 of the year [cranes, drawing, collage] // Sort of went surfing (went into the ocean, at least!) // Made my own cryptic crossword

*2024 intentions:* Keep reading and listening to music from every country // Go surfing again! // Create something every day // Explore the Bay (nature and city) // Go sky-diving


